hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of
neonewstoday.com
i'm your host dylan grabowski
this episode of the smart economy
podcast is part of the series focusing
on women in blockchain
in episode 2 of the women in blockchain
series i chat with dr wendy charles the
chief scientific officer at burst iq
burst iq is a platform that offers a
full end-to-end blockchain enablement
system
with blockchain-based big data
management
consent and data sharing
cognitive computing monetization
and a global data exchange
the company seeks to break down silos
that exist within the health industry
and enable health data to be connected
on a global scale
in this conversation wendy and i discuss
her background in health policy and
compliance
the growing rights individuals have over
their health data
how technology is integrating with the
health field how kovid changed
healthcare appointments
how blockchain technology improves
health industry practices
the growing changes in how organizations
and governments view blockchain and much
more
just a reminder nothing said on this
podcast is a solicitation to buy or sell
any tokens
that nothing should be taken as
financial advice
and that the host or guests may hold
tokens discussed in any given episode
with that said i really enjoyed chatting
with dr charles and i hope you enjoy the
conversation
[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today we are joined by
dr wendy charles
she serves in a variety of roles
including on the health information and
management systems society blockchain
task force
the eu blockchain observatory and forum
expert panel the government blockchain
association healthcare group the
co-chair of the ieee standardization
committee subgroup for blockchain in
life sciences research
has served at the policy home for
various large hospitals and dr charles
also serves as an assistant editor for
frontiers in blockchain and as a peer
reviewer for blockchain articles and
several other journals
and
recently taught a course at the
university of colorado denver how are
you doing today wendy i'm doing well
thank you very much for inviting me yeah
it's an honor and a pleasure to have you
on the podcast we were just kind of
gabbing back and forth how we hadn't
seen each other since 2019
so what is just a general update for
what you've been up to for the past
couple years since then thank you again
for inviting me i feel like i have
become absolutely immersed in the
blockchain space and i feel like it's
been a great opportunity for me also to
be an evangelist about what blockchain
is and what it isn't in the healthcare
technology space
and so i have just been thrilled to be
involved in lots of different committees
lots of different academic articles lots
of presentations and in my role in
helping people understand how blockchain
can fit into some highly conservative
highly traditional technology ecosystems
awesome so let's just get a brief
background and intro of who you are and
eventually how you ended up in the space
you started solely focusing on the
policy side of health care am i correct
well i've been involved in clinical
research for over 30 years and i kept
going back and forth between operations
and compliance
so i had conducted clinical research i'd
served as a research director for a
clinical research site been involved in
academic medicine
and then every couple years then i
switched to the compliance side and i
was an institutional review board
manager twice and uh director of
research regulatory affairs and i still
have a mindset for compliance and the
need to make sure that we do our due
diligence for any technology that we
implement and so now i work full-time as
chief scientific officer at burst iq
which is kind of like a health
information technology company that
utilizes blockchain and ai among its
tools
in order to achieve different goals and
different
types of capabilities for these
technologies awesome so i'm just a
little curious as to how
compliance and policy has changed over
the span of your career and maybe what
are the different focal points that
regulators or hospitals or institutions
might have had that are different from
when you started versus today oh my
goodness well i've already dated myself
i've been pointing out that i've been
involved for 30 years so we've
definitely seen a lot of changes in 30
years especially with the advent of
newer technologies and newer
capabilities that hadn't yet been
invented when the regulations were first
introduced for healthcare regulations
hipaa had been the biggest introduced
new technology the first hipaa
implementation was in 1996 and then i
had to oversee the next major phase of
hepa in 2003 for
including hipaa authorizations for
participation in research and then with
each subsequent
component and advance of hepa it's been
much more agnostic to the development of
different technologies like for example
when the hipaa security rule took effect
in 2006 we all had to scramble with
very detailed
documentation and approaches to how we
manage technology to be more respectful
of the health information we are
entrusted with and as technology has
become more sophisticated and we are
entering a web 3 community and economy
then it's about making sure that we are
still applying that mindset and that due
diligence to newer technologies
and when it comes to the clinical
research regulations i've implemented
many systems that had to comply with the
data integrity regulations for the fda
and ema the european medicine agencies
to ensure that the technologies had
not just the features that are required
but that we perform our due diligence as
a company with utilizing current good
manufacturing practices that the
implementation is thoroughly documented
the training is documented there is
thorough verification that the
technology works exactly as intended and
then validation that we are achieving
endpoints
that are meaning clinically meaningful
and that we can apply this information
in a clinically relevant way and so each
of those regulations has evolved or
the
guidance documents with interpretations
have evolved in order to help us better
understand how to utilize newer
technologies within the same framework
and so i've always applied this mindset
about how can we be very thorough and
responsible in implementing new
technologies in these
ecosystems that are very heavily
regulated
and for
listeners who might not be us-based or
might not have taken these
considerations into mind before could
you just give me a brief overview of
what hipaa is
and why it's so important when it comes
to medical records oh so happy to
explain so hipaa stands for the
health insurance portability and
accountability act
and it was first introduced in order to
allow people to have more portability of
their health insurance but
along the way came the responsibility
for healthcare organizations to provide
more protection of health information
and it's both for the concept of the
information itself and originally we
started with paper records and that
would mean restricting access to
individuals who were not authorized to
see
and over time it's been increasingly
used to give patients more rights about
how their information can be used and
shared and as well as additional
protections for things that weren't
originally considered when hipaa was
first introduced such as all of the
different ways that health information
is used in research for example
and so
some people in the healthcare industry
had complained bitterly about hipaa i
was there from the beginning
and they view it as a burden
but i was involved in compliance already
at the time it was introduced and i
remember what it was like when
medical students and fellows would just
walk into the health information
management department and pull patients
records off of the shelves they were
paper at the time and start going
through them to see if there would be
interesting participants for a research
study and there really wasn't oversight
and there really weren't controls about
protecting this information and
individuals patients would have no idea
how many people would access their
information well at least now we have
better restrictions better documentation
better audit trails so that we can
ensure that information is truly private
and that patients can trust the
healthcare organization that they are
protecting the
records as
individuals would expect
so
my health records at like denver health
right now maybe 30 years ago
somebody who was studying could just go
in and open them up and see oh this
patient came in for a knee surgery and
they took this medication maybe they can
be part of a trial but today
my information is more protected and i
would have to sign off on that it's
actually more complicated than that
because for research studies on health
information
if the information is identifiable you
would first need to go through an
institutional review board to get
permission to do the research because
even though
you may not have contact with
individuals there are still risks to
those individuals about loss of
confidentiality
and there's a second component about
utilization of health information and so
that's where a privacy board and it
could be an institutional review board
acting as a privacy board can issue
what's referred to as a waiver of hipaa
authorization to allow you use of those
health records for research but under
very tightly controlled circumstances
and where the researcher must deploy
very stringent protections for that
information
in order to use it for research so the
majority of research done at denver
health and many other academic medical
centers is this type of retrospective
chart review
but the benefit now is that with
electronic records we have better
mechanisms for tracking and protecting
this information
and we also have to give patients an
accounting of their it's called
accounting of disclosures if we would
have share that in information with
individuals who are not members of that
workforce
so it can be done but there's just more
respect in many ways for the individuals
represented in those records so beyond
the digitization of records and the
increasing
security over them that you know
patients could assume that their
healthcare providers were not sharing
that information
what are some other interesting ways
you've seen technology integrate into
the healthcare field
either from like the hospital level or
from the compliance policy sort of level
oh great question i'm gonna focus on two
areas so the first is i'm really excited
but by what we're seeing in digital
health technologies and that's kind of a
family of technologies that's utilized
to
it can be from sensors that people can
wear at home it can be from wearables it
can be from remote devices in order to
track people where they live and work
and to
enable them to have better health care
oversight while not needing to provide
all of that oversight in a medical
setting so i'm very encouraged that we
can also use this to better understand
how medications are working in clinical
research
for example
if we take a heart medication for
example previously the clinical research
focused on
what were referred to as surrogate
endpoints such as a reduction in
cholesterol for example or heart rate or
something that was measurable
but
it was difficult to infer how much that
was clinically meaningful but now that
we have digital health technologies
where we can track
uh someone's movement say gps to say yes
if they're taking this medication
they have more steps they can
go further from their home
they can participate in more activity
and still be monitored and still be safe
and and those are the things that are
meaningful like patients don't care if
their
cholesterol level changes a few degrees
they care about whether they can attend
their grandchild's birthday party so
digital health technologies enable us to
capture things that can be inferred to
be much more clinically meaningful and
enable their quality of life
so uh the other thing that i find very
encouraging especially when we utilize
blockchain in healthcare is that we can
utilize technology to give patients more
control and more insight as to how their
information is being used and shared and
for that we use consent contracts to
enable a very granular and dynamic forms
of consent and i'm very encouraged that
we now have the technology to enable a
more ethical approach to how we interact
with individuals and how we use or share
or enable them to use and share their
information and previously i'd always
said oh yeah but you know in healthcare
it's always been this way or in clinical
research it's always been this way with
repositories or future unspecified uses
of their data or specimens but now it's
really important for all of us in the
technology ecosystem to ask the question
what if
we could utilize our technology in a
different way
to be more respectful of the individuals
that we served to give them more choices
to give them more options to give them
more insight into their own information
and my hope is that we can further
empower people to become involved in
their own health care their own research
participation and better consumers as
patients
and so that is an evolution too that i'm
very encouraged about and i hope that
many healthcare research organizations
continue to evolve with this mindset
that yes we are capable of doing things
differently than we had before and we
can
extend this technology to
a more ethical degree than we had this
is sort of on topic but it's something
that i hadn't planned on discussing do
you envision a world in the future where
we're going less and less to physical
doctor appointments
and we're doing more telehealth
and maybe there are less urgent care
facilities and less hospitals but more
specific structures for things like
surgeries or things of that nature and
you're removing the general care from
the physical element that's a great
question and the answer is both yes and
no
so
yes in the sense that copic really
changed the way we think about
delivering health care and we realize
that there are many chronic conditions
that can be treated very effectively
with telehealth
using video conferencing with patients
also telepsychiatry tele psychology have
become very popular and we realize that
for many conditions you can talk through
and determine the best form of care
i am also along those lines encourage
that
surgical capabilities are also improving
through remote care in that there are
more robotic devices that are utilized
for surgery as well as the capability
for a surgeon to consult in real time
with surgeons in say a remote area that
may not have that same level of
expertise so we're we are seeing more
advances and i was thrilled to see
a lessening of requirements from the
insurance companies as well as from
licensing state board licensing to allow
more
expansion of telehealth the areas where
we may not see as much is that there's
still a physical
examination component for certain types
of diseases
and so
there's only one way for a physician to
examine an infection for example and you
really need to be seen in person or by
a trained clinician who can recognize
the symptoms and
also i do believe there's a lot to be
said for the interpersonal connections
that we have in healthcare and that
individuals develop relationships with
their healthcare providers and it's
meaningful to sit there in person and to
feel cared for in addition to having
your medical needs met
and so i don't think that telehealth
will ever completely replace medicine
but i'm encouraged that there are better
mechanisms for allowing for
certain conditions to be treated
effectively with telehealth and that
we're even conducting clinical research
more effectively with more remote
monitoring and more remote care but um
yeah i don't know that we'll ever
replace the human element well i guess
maybe to add on to that not necessarily
saying there are going to be robots that
deal with people but are we also
potentially going to see a shift towards
maybe
technicians or physicians going to make
house visits
as opposed to clients or patients coming
to them
with the advent of telehealth and all
these other tele services you were just
describing i don't know the full trend
or scope but i do know that there are
some boutique medical practices that
have arisen especially during colvid
when people were quarantined they still
needed health care
and so
there are some care providers who do
provide
home visits it's often nurses or
physicians assistants in order to give
that personalized care to individuals
who can't travel so
i don't know this full scope but this is
available awesome we spoke earlier about
the advances in technology
as you've progressed in your career
and then in 2009 this anonymous guy or
girl or group of people creates bitcoin
and nine years later
dr charles is looking at completely
moving to a new sector
of the healthcare field so
what was it about blockchain and how
blockchain can empower or improve
medical technologies or the med tech
space what was it about blockchain that
really clicked for you when it clicked
for you i had always been involved in
health information technology in fact
that's the area for my phd i specialize
in health information technology
and in 2017 i attended a conference for
pharmaceutical executives even though i
wasn't
and each of the speakers talked about
blockchain revolutionizing the clinical
trial space
and i said i love to learn about this
technology
and so i started reading what i could
find but it was early 2017 was still at
the beginning of blockchain for
healthcare and most of what was
described was theory
and so i started volunteering at
different
community groups
and attending conferences attending zoom
sessions i volunteered for many
different programs and i started to to
really understand where blockchain had
potential and where there were still
drawbacks and blockchain isn't
necessarily the good fit
and the more i became involved i just
became obsessed
with learning about blockchain
capabilities
i think i enjoyed that it was cutting
edge i think i enjoyed the fact that
this was a technology that was new and
was making such an impact in so many
industries already by that point in 2017
it wasn't just crypto it was an
underlying technology used for supply
chain and for for managing different
forms of exchanges
and so i felt very encouraged that this
technology could be applied effectively
in healthcare as long as we treated it
like a health information technology and
so
what i am particularly motivated by
today is that we are seeing a lot of
progress and development in that
governments are much more receptive and
interested in how blockchain can be
utilized
and that organizations are starting to
learn about how blockchain technology
must also apply to the regulations that
are technology agnostic
and this will become then a component of
an ecosystem it may be helpful for our
listeners too for me to point out that
blockchain isn't any one thing it's a
set of tools and technologies that are
applied in many different ways and
aspects throughout different industries
and that
organizations utilize the components
that are the best fit with similar
features across different industries so
yes in in healthcare and life sciences
we largely utilize private permission
blockchains just due to the
confidentiality requirements in the
regulations but it has potential for
allowing us to manage data very
differently than we had before much more
efficiently and effectively and
introduce some new capabilities as well
and some of those capabilities might be
things like um introducing identity
solutions for patients
something i wanted to pull your ear on
is how has the pharmaceutical supply
chain
or any other supply chain been
positively impacted by the
implementation of
these consortia or private chains that's
a great question so there are currently
two major pilots being conducted in the
united states with the active
participation of the fda
to utilize blockchain as a mechanism of
allowing organizations to more
effectively meet the drug supply chain
security act so that takes effect next
year in 2023 and because blockchain has
such a wonderful underlying technology
for managing provenance
it's really an ideal underlying solution
underneath the application layers to
allow the right level of permissioned
transparency as well as tracking of the
providence so i'm very encouraged that
blockchain is an effective solution for
the drug supply chain
we have been seeing lots of capabilities
with other aspects of the supply chain
as well in other industries it's my
understanding although i can't confirm
this that the new york shipping exchange
had been using blockchain since 2016. we
are moving past
pilots into full implementations and
i'm very encouraged that the fda has
been so actively involved
it just kind of gives its blessing for
organizations who are conservative and
we're uncertain about whether the fda
would accept
this technology and they are not just
accepting that they are active
participants in its progress
and i guess uh to play devil's advocate
could you maybe help me understand why a
permissioned chain
might serve a better feature than say a
database that everybody can equally
access that's provided through a single
company you know that question comes up
in almost every conference i've been at
every presentation so many people say oh
well i can just hard curb that
well yes you could but when you utilize
the tools of blockchain you can often
achieve your desired purpose in
one-third the time and one-third cost so
why wouldn't you
we utilize blockchain in those areas
where you need to have specific managed
control of information
and allow individuals or organizations
to have layers of automation and layers
of governance
and
when we talk about individual patients
this comes under the components of
dynamic and granular consent of giving
patients more access and control of
their information
you could hard code all of those
capabilities
but since blockchain has inherent
features that allow when we utilize the
smart contracts like consent contracts
it allows for the automation of the
permission all the way down in a much
more efficient way than could be
hard-coded so i just point out yes you
could blockchain is software not magic
you could utilize the software in many
different ways but if you had a tool
that allowed you to go to market sooner
that allowed you to be much more
efficient with precious resources why
wouldn't you would you say that these
blockchain networks the private
permission networks are
removing redundancy from
different entities that need to
communicate with one another as opposed
to having maybe two
executive assistants
having to pass off paperwork to a doctor
or somebody to sign off now you can have
this consent contract that automatically
does that on behalf of these entities
yes that's one component i i think
another component that's worthwhile to
mention is the concept of trust
and in healthcare the underlying
electronic health records have an audit
trail in clinical trials
the data integrity components require
there to be a detailed audit trail
but there were many facets of healthcare
such as sharing
automation that were not traceable
and we didn't have confidence about how
the information was being managed but
when you utilize blockchain as an as an
underlying technology for some of that
data sharing you have transparency who
and who has access to records how it was
shared
and because the technology
includes that inherently it doesn't
require a lot of extra programming in
order for you to have those benefits and
so like for example the country of
estonia has a single-payer healthcare
system and they added a layer blockchain
on top of their healthcare system in
2016.
but the large part for the purpose was
to better track access
for access to individuals health records
within the healthcare system and for
authorized individuals who were given
permission by patients to access their
health records and advocate on their
behalf
and so it was a just a much more
effective way of being able to track
both allow permissions and access uh who
has utilized those permissions so that
an individual can better trust
um how their information is used and
protected
this is kind of a difficult premise to
kind of dig into but
along with these permission chains and
the ability for
me as a patient to be able to grant
access to
somebody who wants to study my records
or even to share the data
what about a complementary
data storage service where
i know my medical records can be
uploaded to
something equivalent to ipfs or
something like that and i don't now have
to go to denver health to get a physical
copy of my records to go to another
provider that's within within my network
is this also something that's being
thought about built is it already built
what are kind of
the data storage
solutions to this problem that is a
fantastic question and
with a couple different promising areas
for growth and improvement
the first is is largely what you're
talking about the technical term for it
is a personal health record and that's
where an individual can manage and store
their own health record and share it as
they desire so they might download their
health record from multiple providers
and then they manage themselves in one
place it's often done in a traditional
database system but we are increasingly
i mean first iq is actually actively
participating with some of our partners
at creating these personal health
records systems that allow for much more
transmissibility much more access and
granular sharing
with some of those key components of
blockchain for the trust
so another thing that's promising is
that since
the united states government has
required that patients have much more
access to their health information than
previous and we're also seeing under
tough cuts there are requirements to
establish health information exchange
and qualified health networks that are
required to exchange health information
and allow it to be shared much more
effectively well blockchain is really an
ideal underlying technology for many of
those exchanges so that it can automate
some of the data flow and also
manage with the appropriate audit trails
some of the access to that information
so some people say well wait a minute
with blockchain how do you manage
patient keys you know do you do they
have to manage private keys and public
keys and how do they share those
that
is too difficult for many patients to be
able to do lord knows they can't even
remember user names and passwords and we
all have too many of those to begin with
so it is possible to tie those public
and private keys with a built-in a
hidden hot wallet for those in the
blockchain community familiar with this
but it's kind of like um a private
online wallet where you can store the
private and public keys and you
associate them with the username and
password so that an individual can still
log into a website with a username and
password they just don't know that
they're interacting with the blockchain
and the blockchain the smart contracts
associate their private and public keys
with their whatever login information
and we also establish single sign-on
capabilities for patients so then if
they log into the patient portal for an
electronic health record system
that single sign-on in that health
record system can also grant permission
for them to
access some information that's managed
by the blockchain so they still have to
authenticate
as an individual using their sign-on
with their healthcare system which is
permitted under hipaa we just make it
easy for individuals to also access
blockchain features and
i can hardly think of any situation
where patients actually know that
they're interacting with the blockchain
it doesn't matter it's just that the
blockchain is part of the technology
ecosystem and allows the technology to
work more effectively i've been saying
for years that by the time blockchain is
mainstream quote unquote people will not
even know they're using it just like i
can't tell you what tcpip is and why it
powers the internet we use
agreed i
am wondering if there were any sort of
like perverse incentives for medical
providers to silo this information and
what those might have been
well i don't know about health care
providers because hepa requires them and
state statutes also require providers to
provide specific protections for health
information and levels of access to
patients and their authorized their
legally authorized representatives where
we see siloing however you are very
correct in pointing out that there are
some perverse incentives for research
organizations not to share data
the nih has been the national institutes
of health in the united states has been
requiring researchers to make data
available that had been collected using
american taxpayer dollars
under u.s grants
and
while they were required to create a
data it's called a data management plan
where
they would have to
also describe the circumstances of
removing identifiers and providing data
sets when requested
it's difficult to get researchers to
want to share their data with others
especially when researchers may have
spent years collecting and managing that
data
and so i am hopeful that when blockchain
can better
protect identifiers we we see promising
tokenization and we see better
collaboration methods using blockchain
that it will allow researchers to share
their data more freely while still
knowing that it's protected and that
they have insights to how the data are
being used by other researchers so in
public blockchain networks there's often
an economic layer that's baked into the
tech stack and from
my vague understanding for permissions
networks this is more
for enterprise entities to be able to
share some sort of distributed database
but also an issue with that comes
keeping information
protected you don't want your competitor
to know how much you spent on x amount
of products
so as
you've mentioned a lot of these medical
solutions rely on permission to chains
is there a world where this economic
incentive is starting to be incorporated
into permission chains so that these
entities can maybe even
rent out or sell
this information i believe so so you
know the private permission chains are
less likely to be based on a blockchain
involving cryptocurrency
so
there are some like private ethereum
enterprise ethereum but
the cryptocurrency doesn't drive the
transactions and the shared management
of the chain in the same way as many of
the public blockchains do so when
introducing monetization we're often
associating the utilization of data with
a different financial mechanism where
individuals can be monetized for sharing
their information
so some of the organizations like
research repositories that are
established on blockchain genetic
repositories either have their own coin
that individuals can earn when
sharing their data or it can be
associated with a fiat currency such as
giving a person a credit card and then
information is loaded
but using external providers to load
that monetization
and there is one company one blockchain
marketplace that gives people shares of
the company in order to share their data
and so we're seeing creative mechanisms
by which data can be monetized and going
back to individuals
and it required each of them requires a
lot of thoughtful planning about whether
it's a security or a utility token or
what kind of tracking is necessary
because these are known individuals
and in order to pay it the known
individual you also have text
implications and so
there has to be a kyc or know your
customer mechanism for some of these
health related
blockchains it's possible some of your
audience members might disagree with me
on components i welcome
different ideas about how we could still
utilize enough of the data linking and
data sharing capabilities and still
manage some of the kyc mechanisms that
are required for monetization yeah and
with everything in the crypto blockchain
space there's a spectrum and people fall
on very different ends and very
different places on the spectrum of
centralization versus decentralization
anonymity versus being completely known
so
burst iq has built its own permissioned
blockchain correct life graph yes and we
refer to it as the life graph network
because our technology enables you to
create a longitudinal profile of a
person place or thing
and be able to link multiple data sets
so that you have this very rich
knowledge graph of an individual which
allows for much deeper insights for
health care for research for even
business insights
and the life graph is really
what drives burst iq in order to create
a blockchain that provides more
sophisticated capabilities than than
many other companies offer so can you
share some examples of entities or
hospitals or just the types of partners
that you guys work with sure i i'm happy
to talk about one of our close partners
uh it's eht advisors and they are using
our life grants in order to link
services for individuals who are justice
involved and so these are people who may
have been incarcerated for a period of
time and are reintegrated in the
community and so they require services
and assistance for many different
organizations it could be for
job assistance it could be for mental
health services
it could be for
community integration such as uh need
for community housing
and
all of these services really need to
communicate with each other about how
best to address the needs of an
individual
and so by utilizing a life graph all of
that information can be linked
while still protected and using the
granular consent the individual also has
much more control over how to share that
that information so you can develop very
deep insights when you can connect
multiple sources of health and
vocational information in order to best
serve an individual and who might want
access to that information like state
government entities like dola
other mental health service facilities
what are some examples of the types of
entities that want to access that on
behalf of the individual definitely
healthcare organizations
and for those who require additional
services for substance abuse or
mental health services would need to
know well that individual is being
reintegrated
i am not familiar with all of the
different programs that would also need
to access that information
but the reason i ask is when i was in
grad school we studied this service
called housing first basically it's
you provide a house first and then
everything else will fall in line
so the criteria for
entering into this program was you had
to be chronically homeless and a chronic
alcoholic
and so the theory was was these are the
segments of of the population
that are probably going to
prisons or jails most often they're
probably going to the hospital and
there's a lot of taxpayer dollars that
they're spending so if we provide a
house first then everything else will
fall in line so
part of those services included
matching housing finding jobs connecting
mental health services physical health
services so i was just curious if you
have
various different alphabet soups of
governments that are trying to connect
with lifegraph government yes um and
i'll talk about some other particular
projects other than
the great work that's being done with
justice involved individuals so where
governments are really interested in is
how best to manage the collection and
distribution of health information on a
population level
and so for example in the united states
the department of health and human
services took over the covid reporting
collection and aggregation analysis
process from the centers for disease
control in part because the information
is managed on a blockchain
and the blockchain itself was very
effective in understanding where the
discrepancies potential discrepancies
may have arisen and because there was an
inherent audit trail they could
determine if one
community organization or one hospital
had double reported on accident for
example or had gaps in reporting and
then there was a jump that could be
explained by aggregate reporting
so at a population level is a very
effective mechanism of utilizing privacy
preserving
strategies for the health information
while also managing permissions at a
very granular level and yes you could do
that with the database too but it's just
much more efficient when utilizing some
blockchain tools to be able to do that i
am encouraged to the state of wyoming
has really been a pioneer at managing
more government programs for
voting for land records
in the state of colorado we have
definitely been trying to be
among the thought leaders in how best to
advance i am encouraged that
in 2018 our state passed a statute that
provided funds to educate students about
blockchain and
the colorado universities
and also to encourage the different
departments around i guess county level
departments something like that around
the state to investigate use of
blockchain technologies in order to
improve some efficiencies yeah i worked
for jefferson county as a planner zoning
and planning and there was zero
communication with the 63 other counties
and we were not able to
share what worked what didn't what
overlaps there wasn't even a cohesive
database from county to county as it
pertained to keeping records for
homeowners and
the permits they may or may not have
applied for so it's always uh refreshing
to hear that there's
some positive movement towards creating
a cohesion among county level
governments
cognizant of your time i
want to wrap up with a little bit of a
conversation just surrounding the
concept of women and blockchain i have
this theory
that because there is this anonymous and
pseudonymous element to
the blockchain space
that maybe
more people of all different types are
empowered to participate because it's
their proof of work
on a github that everybody sees so i'm
just wondering from your perspective
are you seeing a different level of
involvement from the women in the
blockchain industry versus other policy
or healthcare industries that you've
been a part of throughout your career
and if there is or isn't any noticeable
difference
i can only speak anecdotally anecdotally
yes
so uh my personal experience is that i
was often the only woman in many
community forums and i was so thrilled
to be there because i felt like i had a
voice about how
you know each of us brings a different
background a different perspective into
the blockchain space it's very very
diverse
and that each of our voices is important
and valuable for advancing blockchain in
our industries when blockchain first
started it started as cryptocurrency and
so it was definitely much more male
dominated but as the industries the
number of industries utilizing
blockchain has expanded we're seeing
much more representation of the people
involved in technologies in those
industries and for healthcare is still a
male
dominated area however there have been
wonderful programs to integrate women in
health information technology and to
provide much more effective training and
understanding about what blockchain is
and how it can serve the industries i am
thrilled personally i serve as an
adjunct professor to the university of
colorado denver in the health
administration department
and i teach introduction to health
information technology there are a lot
of women who participate in the program
and
i get to teach about blockchain as a
technology that they really do need to
learn about as part of health
information technology and have a
realistic understanding of what
blockchain can encounter do i'm also
thrilled to report in the state of
colorado that the department of higher
education has been actively involved in
understanding what are the needs of the
workforce
and since the chamber of digital
commerce had released a report that in
2019 knowledge of blockchain was the
number one unmet need for the work of
the employers in workforce and that our
state has taken an active role to
recognize that we need to prepare
the colorado graduates for some of these
critical skills involving blockchain
distributed ledger technologies web3
technologies and to ensure that we have
a viable local workforce to be able to
meet the needs of industries in colorado
so i i definitely see that as blockchain
becomes more mainstream we are seeing
more women get involved and be confident
so any women listening to this podcast i
would encourage you to get out there
speak your voice because we need to hear
about your background and experiences
and has how to best move forward with
these technologies and what do you think
the role of mentorship is in increasing
the diversity for women in blockchain
and
maybe what's the best way that somebody
can seek a mentor that's a great
question
so in many programs the students are
paired with individuals who are active
in the industry so that they can
learn from those individuals but how did
they get in you know what was
challenging what was effective
and
what advice would those mentors have
about how best to become integrated what
coursework do you need to take what
kinds of connections or experiences do
you need to make so
in a formal education setting that's
certainly available i i would encourage
those who would like to get involved in
blockchain to get involved in women in
blockchain
so that they can
meet other women who are working in this
space and
learn about how they have been
successful and empowered also anyone can
connect with me as well and i'm happy to
either provide some insight or connect
them with other women who are very
active in this space and maybe what's
the best way to
learn about the women in blockchain
community and what's the best way to get
in contact with you sure
i believe the website is
womeninblockchain.com
and the best way to connect with me is
on linkedin
and you can look for me wendy charles
and if you did wendy charles blockchain
you would definitely know that you had
found me awesome wendy thank you so much
for coming to join the smart economy
podcast i've been fascinated by
your talks and presentations and just
following you along with your journey
into blockchain
leveraging the skill experience and
expertise you brought into the space so
it was awesome to finally be able to
catch up with you i can't wait to see
you again in person and maybe attend one
of your meetups or
a burst iq event it's just been great to
be able to catch up with you thank you
so much for inviting me today awesome
well have a great day and uh thank you
so much for coming on cheers
well what did you think of that
conversation
it was really cool to learn about the
role that sensors and mobile
applications can have in improving the
quality of patient information
and how it's shared with health
providers
for example if a certain medication is
enabling patients to move around more
it was also really interesting to hear
more about how the food and drug
administration a major u.s federal
agency
is spearheading blockchain-based
initiatives and the positive impact that
has on the adoption of the technology
into conservative organizations
and
it was really cool to hear that
blockchain processes are improving the
speed efficiency and cost of outdated
practices of sharing health data with
that i want to thank you so much for
taking the time to listen to the smart
economy podcast
if you liked what you heard and want to
support the show
please keep neonies today in mind when
voting for your neo council
representative as part of neo's
governance process
we appreciate you and look forward to
catching you next time